Ashrama Vyavastha - individual scheme - Vaidica's or Vedic life is divided into 4 stages - Chathwarah ashrama - Brahmacharya(student - education phase - knowing the importance of material and spiritual goals), Gaarhastya(family - pursuit of Preyaha), vanaprastha(Hermit - withdraw from preyaha - prepare for spiritual pursuit), and Sanyasa(dedicated to spiritual pursuit). 

Ashrama scheme is more important and relevant than Varna scheme.
"Shramaha" => effort - deliberate, willful, well directed effort is called shramah, here the effort is spiritual sadhana or sadhana anushtaanam
"Ashrmaha" => place where person practices spiritual sadhana

Aasamanthaath shramaha aadhyaathmica saadhana anushtaanam yasmin saha – sapthami vibhakthi – a stage in which a person is committed to spiritual sadhana, the entire life is divided into four ashramas hence the entire life is a spiritual journey(series of spiritual sadhanas)

The only true goal is Moksha, but accepting the immaturity of human beings - scriptures talk about other three goals - vedas give sadhanas which are like sugar coated pills - sweet outside but medicine inside - sadhanas for dharmaartha kaama but what is the hidden agenda, sadhana for moksha. 
These four stages are very similar to butterfly - egg -> worm -> pupa -> butterfly(most attractive) - jeevan mkutha is a buttery - attractive to people and feeling light in life. 

Chathwarah Ashrama

1. Brahmacharya - committed to education - what is the purpose and content of education? A secondary aspect of it earning a lively hood - learning professional skills; Primary purpose is refinement of a person - character building - transformation of person so that they fit harmoniously within society; When born we are wild-human - we should become man-man - then we should become God-man; Analogy of metal - discovery of metal (crude form) - refinement in factory(making it commercial); When we born we are unrefined - then we should go to Gurukul - get refined; hence we become dwijaah(two janmas) - Prakritha janah to samskritha janah – crude human beings to cultured human beings - this is the job of education; 
Manu Smriti talks about two kinds of parents - Mathuragre athi jananam, dwitheeyam mounjee bhandhanaath – thathraasya maathaa gaayathri pithaathu aacharya uchyathe. First set of parents is the biological parents through whom I am born in an unrefined form.Then I go to my acharya or guru and who gives gayatri mantra – gayatri represents vidhya, education, shastra gnyaanam scriptural study and this acharya is the father, and gayatri or saraswathi is the mother.Guru is the father and education mother will convert me into a useful, refined mature human being.  

We saw GOAL of education; 
next what is the type of education that scriptures prescribe?
Three things are important - 
i. Know what is the ultimate goal - moksha; animal-man -> man-man -> God-man; 
So yah aatmaanam avidhithvaa asmaan lokaah praithee sa kripanah and yah aksharam vidhithwaa praithee saha eva braahmanah.Brhadaranyaka says, and therefore the student must know that the spiritual goal is the ultimate goal, it has to be informed.
ii. Knowledge of some form of religious worship or ritual - since it helps disciple - they reinforce eachother;
iii. Building dynamism in life - laziness is most natural thing to body - Aalasyamhi manushyaanaam shareerastho mahaan rhipuhu - unless we have got physical routine, laziness will not go.  tamo guna nivrthyartham, physicallized ritual – if you don’t walk around the temples, you will be forced to walk on the beach.
Discipline, dynamism and ultimately devotion to Lord can be developed only by physicallized expression. - even in relationships you have to constantly say "I love you..." and stuff. This physicalized emotion will also nourish my emotion => every expression is a cause and consequence of emotion. I do pooja, I am expressing my devotion. Not only am I expressing my devotion, through pooja, I am nourishing my devotion. And therefore our relationship with the Lord is kept alive and it is nourished throughout the life. Ultimately, the only permanent relationship we have is with God, all other relationships will end. Sthothram is verbalized devotion and pooja is physicalized devotion - with this we remain in touch with God. 

Hence education should teach - what is the goal - importance of worship - important values that constant and can't be changed. And we should adjust our lives based on these constants - we should abide by these constants. 
Shaswatha dharma it is, sanaathana dharma it is, eternal values they are, I should understand them, I should assimilate them, and I should know that I cannot compromise them without damaging my physical, emotional and intellectual health. This has to be understood. 

I should know the goal, I should know the value of physicalized worship and I should also know the values of life.And once I go through these three stages, I am a refined human being.

2. Grhasthaashram - family life is primarily a religious institution sanctified through a religious process or ceremony and meant for religious life primarily. Materialistic purposes are incidental by products. If we think material goals like security and pleasure or comfort are the primary purposes then such a family life will become either unstable or it will soon become irrelevant. When you look at the family from a purely materialistic angle, you will get a totally different picture. That is what is happening now.

Now we get a society in which all are economically empowered to fulfill their artha kaama, and once that is fulfilled, the basic question comes, why should we be living together at all.Because nobody depends on anyone. Nobody needs the other one and therefore the very purpose of living together is questioned.

If you say, it is because we like each other, unfortunately human likes and dislikes constantly change. And especially in a consumerist society, the philosophy is never keep a thing for long. 
If anybody commands the return threat will be "I will walk out"
As long as materialistic purposes are kept in mind, family will be unstable or the family institution will become irrelevant. Therefore the scriptures say religion is the primary purpose of grhasthaashrama. Once that attitude comes, the family bond is looked as a 
sacred bond caused by God himself.
grhasthaha - grhey thishtathy – hooked to house
Marriages are made in heaven - The bond is a sacred bond determined by God’s will and therefore God alone has the right to dismantle the bond. God has brought the bond and God alone has the right to remove the bond. Only in such an attitude the family will be stable. And then only in a stable family, a person can develop the important virtues like tolerance
Thithiksha, tolerance, accommodation, forgiveness, trust, etc. are important virtues which can be developed only in a stable family. Stable family is required for raising emotionally healthy children. This they have found, that wherever the family is unstable, there is a disharmony and dislike.The children sense the disharmony and therefore grhasthaashrama is extremely important for myself as well as for the next generation. 

3. Vanaprashta - as we grow older, the physical body cannot get into external activities –the physical body withdraws and if there should be no strain, then the mind also should learn to gradually withdraw.Otherwise you will find the strain in the personality – the mind is highly active and the physical body is not able to implement.
This is a training period for self knowledge. Turning towards the Self. I have learnt enough of the world, let me tap the life with the knowledge of myself. So vanaprastha stage is a stage of withdrawal introversion and seclusion. Preparing for Sanyasa - secondary education. 

4. Sanyasa - spiritual education with introvert mind and living in seclusion; Brahmachaarya s value education, dharma gyanam 
vaanaprashta ashrama is learning introversion, sanyaasa ashram is education.Literally vanaprastha means the one who lives in seclusion. Vanaanaam samoohaha vaanam.Vaanay prakarshena thishtathy ithi vanaprastha.Grhasthaha is grhey thishtathy ithigrhasthaa.

Grahastha means planet - we all are grahastha; Grhastha means house

And sanyasa literally means giving up everything.Renunciation of everything and primarily renunciation of your ignorance and ego. - mentally prepared to lose anything in life, 
because Yamadharmaraja is going to come, ellathayum eduthundu popporaar. Before Yama threatens, I am ready to handover everything in a platter.



So whether a person physically goes through all stages or not, one should mentally go through all the four stages and sanyasa in a ritualistic form is called ashrama sanyasa in which he physically renounces everything, but whether one physically renounces or not, one should mentally develop detachment from everything so that he is ready for self knowledge.