Varna ashrama/ वणा् अमष vyavastha(scheme)

vibhaaga means classification

The scriptures are willing to help those people who are willing to take its assistance.No enforcement.We never believe in forcing. It helps whoever has got faith in Sastram and is humble to take its assitance to acheive Chaturvida Purshaartha. Scriptures offer an infrastructure to attain these goals. Similar to real word, infrastructure is requried to make progress possible. Infra given by Veda is Varna Ashrama Vyvasthaa - an ideal scheme for accomplishing four-fold goals - Veda takes into account both spiritual and material(cause we have to obv surive in this world) - "mere" material success is useless. eg. Arjun in Kurukshetra. But, materially success balanced equally with spiritual is what a successful life is. 
Yovaa etha daksharam gaargi avi dithwaa asmaan lokaadhpraithi sakruppannah athaya eta dhaksharam gaargi vidithwaa asmaan lokaadhpraithi sabraahmannah– Brhadhaarannyaka Upanishad says the truly successful person is one who has discovered his real spiritual nature.

Varna Vyavastha - a social(sociological) and macro scheme for upliftment of, prosperity of society as a whole
Ashrama Vyavastha - a scheme keeping individual growth and success in mind. 

In Varna Vyavastha the whole humanity or society is divided into four groups(Varnas) - Varna Vibhaagah - each group is like an organ of the society; 
The four varnas - Braahmanna, Vaishya, Kshatriya, and Shoodra varnha. 
Varnas, Vibhaagah => group
What is the basis of classification? whenever you talk of classification, you should ask the question – what is the basis of classification – so that I can determine into which group I belong.

three different basis or conditions on which the society can be classified
1. Character - Personality, inclination, trait, Guna Vibhaagah - four sub personality types guna braahmannah,guna kshatriyah, guna Vaishya or guna shoodra. Let's see what makes each of these personality types
i) Guna Braahmana - Sathwa pradhaana -Spiritual personality - gravitates towards spirituality - one who loves withdrawal, solitude, silence, contemplationl, enquiry and pursuit of ultimate reality. Sanyasa and renunciation appeals to such a mind. 
ii) Guna Kshatriya - shuddha rajas pradhaana - dynamic personality - loves activity - outgoing, active, planning, energetic, dynamic, highly motivated mind, all these are selfless. Interests are are not self centered - interested in contribution, serving, uplifting, helping the society. Heavily contributes to material progress of society - noble causes - selflessly movtivated mind.
iii) Guna Vaishya - ashuddha rajah pradhaanah - dynamic personality - same as above - can't sit quiet for some time, can't be silent, can't think of solitude, renunciation or contemplation. The difference from the previous one is, it is highly self-centered - selfishly motivated personality - every activity for the benefit of me and my family. 
iv) Guna Shudra - Tamah pradhaana - passive, lethargic, no motivation - no purushartha appeal - mere goal of live is eating, surviving, and dying - very close to animalistic lifestyle. 

2. Profession/occupation/work - Karma Vibhaaga - work or contribution done to society. the segregation is not watertight, but overlapping
i) spiritual learning and teaching - Whose life is confined to scriptures.Vaidicam karma.Scriptural related karma – karma braahmannah. - our scriptures are extensive and intensive - hence we have sub, sub-sub, sub-sub...-sub commentaries - to understand and teach this vast literature we need someone who dedicates their entire life for the study and propagation of vedas in its original Samskritam form(don't read them in translation because it's funny, and you will loose its spiritual value. . eg. learning Gita itself takes 5-7 years. This also implies that not all can learn vedas, just like MBBS. 
The thing is even mere chanting of vedas is beneficial and good for society. - Vedic vibration is helpful for the society. Hence a group dedicated to Veda Adhyayanam/adhyaapanam, paaraayanam, paatanam, interpretation. Interpretation because, what is said 100 years ago, should be fine-tuned for today's situation - someone has to flexibly interpret Sastram for modern society - they should be scriptural consultants of the society  and infact they have to serve as even psychiatrists of the society, since scriptures deal with psychological problems. 
ii) Karma kshatriya - all forms of public service - Administration of the country, governing the society, maintenance of the law and order, policing the society, defending the country, army - so that people can peacefully and appropriately pursue their goals - a certain atmosphere should be maintained for the achieving purushaartha. In olden days, it was Raja's job, today we call public service. 
iii) Karma Vaishya - All forms of commericial activites, business, trade - important for eqaual distribution and sharing of wealth for the req of society
iv) Karma Shudra - all forms of labor - unskilled or semi-skilled - cannot think, but do activity for other person - no independent thinking but service to other three people

3. Jaathi - birth(Jaathi in Sanskrit) - Purely based on jnma or the family into which one is born; jan => "to be born"; sub categories are jaathi (Braahmana, kshatriya, vaishya, shoodra)

Let's talk about gradation of the sub types in each of thee classification types:
In Jaathi and Karma - all are equal - Jaathi thaha sarvey abhi samaah yath. 
Caste system - using the privilege of Jaathi to demand some thing. In Karma also all are equal from this angle only purushsooktham mantra occurs – braahmanosyo mukhamaaseeth, Baahooraajanya krthah, ooruthathasya yadh vaishyah padhyaagum shoodro ajaayatha – this example isfor karma vibhaaga, just as four organs have got four different functions, similarly four varnas have four different functions.Braahmannah mukhamaaseeth means teaching profession, scriptural teaching.Baahooraajanyah means maintenance of law and order and oorruththasya yadh vaishyah – means – taking care of the economic strength of the 
society.Support system.And padhyaagum shoodro ajaayatha means all forms of labor. By saying all the four are parts of the lord, we say all of them are equally sacred - can't say paadas are less sacred than mukham - infact we do paada pooja not hastha/ooru pooja - Shankaracharya is called Bhagavad Paada not Bhagavad Shirah.  jaathee thaara thamyam naasthi, karma thaara thamya naasthi 

In Guna we have grading - Guna (Brahmana > Kshatriya > Vaishya > Shudra) since Guna shudra is close to animals and Guna Brahmana is close to God. 
Character matters the most - hence character superiority is what one should achieve - they deserve namaskara - eg. Prahalada, son of Hiranyakshipu - though rakshasa, is revered highly - infact we should worship him before Narada; Prahalada Narada Parashara;

Let's talk about choice - can we choose to be part of some Guna, Karma, and Jaathi?
1. Jaathi - not this, but can choose in next birth; Shuchi naam shreemathaam gehe yoga prashtobhijaayathe
2. Karma - yes, we can choose from three perspective - 
i) swabhaava/character - personality based - ideal - because you will love your profession, and it will not be a burden. 
ii) heredity based - Birth based - there won't be competition, no over-crowd, certain field won't be neglected
iii) money based - worst - when money becomes important match fixing comes, corruption is inevitable in a society where money is God. 
Infact karma yoga can be ideally practiced if you love what you do. Very performance of it gives you thripthi.
3. Guna - all spiritual sadhanas are to improve our Guna to guna-Braahmanathwam; We should become Guna Brahmanaas ultimately. 

we have choice in all these aspects - 
it is called varnah because there is choice. - Vriyathe ithi varnah

You can choose your janma, the next janma, you can choose your profession, you can choose your character but the choice of character is ultimately important.This is the Varna vyavastha.

---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 
Sanskrit words, verses and shlokas
---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 
