We saw goals,
We saw Scriptures, 
We saw infrastructure or atmosphere
Now let's see course of discipline for accomplishment of human goals

Note all our accomplishments should culminate to spiritual accomplishment of Moksha, without it life is incomplete. 
Scriptures keep material accomplishment as incidental goals and the spiritual accomplishments as the ultimate goal. Only moksha can give complete fulfillment.

Now keeping all the goals, especially the spiritual goal of moksha in mind, the scriptures prescribe a course of discipline which we call Sadhana. 
Sadhana or Sadhanam - course of discipline
Saadhyam - goal that we want to accomplish
Saadhaka - when take up the discipline(Sadhana)
Siddha - once we accomplish Saadhyam
Saadhaka through saadhana should attain saadhyam thus become siddha.

The entire Sadhana is presented in three levels - each level is called Yoga. 
Yoga means - connects/links Saadhaka(Seeker) and Saadhyam(Sought)
Yuj - combine - unite - Unites what? - Saadhaka and Saadhyam
Yujyathe saadhyenasah saadhakah yena karannam vibhakthi sahaa sadhana

Three levels of Yoga - Karma, Upaasana, Gnyaana
For one to reach Moksha - all the three levels are mandatory, can't skip any.

Karma Yoga - proper action with proper attitude
Karma - proper or appropriate action
Yoga - proper or appropriate attitude

All human actions are broadly classified into three type based on their spiritual influence on human beings - they are not categorized based on their material benefits/influence
Three types - Uthamam Karma(maximum spiritual benefit), Madhyamam Karma(mediocre, intermediary, nil spiritual influence, might have lot of spiritual benefits), Adhama karmaani(Causes spiritual fall, spiritual retrogression)

1. Uthama karamani - Sathwica Karmaani - Nishkaama Karmaani - Para upakaara karmaani
All those actions which will benefit maximum number of beings
Para upakaara karmanni are greatly praised in our scriptures

shrooyathaam karma sarvasvam  
shruthwaa chaiva avadhaaryathaam 
paropakaara punyaaya  
paapaaya para peedanam.

Paropakaaraaya vahanthi nadhyah  
paropakaaraaya guhanthi gaavah  
paropakaaraya phalanthi vrikshaah  
paropakaaraartha midham shareeram– 

Here you give more and take less. 
Greater giving, greater growing.
Our culture is giving culture. 
Dhaanam culture, tyaagam culture. 
Materialistic culture is grabbing culture. 

Para UPakaara Karmaani are presented as Panca mahaa yagnyaah - five fold yagnyaas - for contributing to the welfare of the world

Yagnya - gratitude + upakaara

i. Deva yagnya - workship and prayer of god
just stand in front of the Lord in the form of any ishta devatha and with my full and total heart utter a prayer - it is the noblest prayer and it is known in our scriptures - not only humans but for entire terrestrial plane - all 14 lokas. 

swasthih prajaavyabh paripaalayanthaam  
gnyaayena maargenna maheem maheesha  
Go braahmanebhyah subamasthu nithyam– 
lokaah samasthaah sukhinah bhavanthu.

Sarvey bhavanthu sukhinah, sarvey santhu niraa mayaah sarve bhadrraani pashyanthu maakashchithu dhukka bhaadbhave

By uttering these two prayers - we are doing great contribution to creation. this is the most extensive and least expensive paropakaara - along with this if you offer something to lord, that is also distributed to the entire creation.
God has got universal trust - God is the trustee - Whatever is offered in any pooja, in any abhishekam, nothing will be wasted - everything will be taken by God and distributed to the every living entity. 
Maanava seva is Madhava Seva - very popular today - but socialist don't even recognize that Madhava Seva is more extensive Maanava Seva - this reaches entire creation. This needs to be done daily. 

First Gratitude towards God. 

ii. Pithru Yagnya - 
Second gratitude towards - all my forefathers - they shaped who I am here - Parents have brought me up without knowing whether we are going to do anything in return. Here we are not only focusing on our Pithru but also all those Pithru who children don't perform Shraardha or those who don't have children. This is done in through ancestors relief fund. 
In Kali yuga we will have non believers, so Sastram planned ahead. 

Yesham na maatha na pitha na mithra gnyaathi bhaandhavaa they sarve thripthi maayaanthu mayo srishtaihi kushodhakai
Tey sarve thripthi maayaanthu mayaa uthsrishtai kushodhakai.


So therefore pithru yagnya is thanks giving plus paropakaara.

iii. Brahma Yagnya - expressing gratitude to all the rishis - who have given out vedas - Brhama means "Veda"
What is their aim? What do they want to do?
Rishis have only one intention - preservation and propagation of this teaching - whatever I contribute to this is itself a great service. 
--i--. The very sound of scriptures is itself is helpful - creates peace - hence paaraayanam is a great Saadhana.
Mere chaingting of Veda purifies the creation. - I chant the scriptures aloud, the very shabdha, the very veda gosha – gosha means what – loud chanting, purifies the creation
--ii--.  Teaching - adhyaapanam - 
Adhyaapanam brahma yagnya – pithru yagnyasthu tharpanam homo daivo bayir bhauthah mriyagnyo dhithi poojanam

There is a big difference between teaching and preaching; 
preaching - giving a set of stray discourses on un-connected topics. - Satsanaga
teaching - a development, there is connection between every topic and all the ideas are supported through scriptures through logic and through experience. 

When I give some stray ideas through preaching, I am only dumping some bricks which will not be directly useful for you.You will have to rearrange it and make a total teaching.And you cannot arrange the bricks.Again you require another person to come and help you, a mason is required.Whereas teaching is like – not only giving the ideas, but arranging the ideas in a systematically developed manner so that you have got a beautiful vision in which you will get security, peace and happiness.

vidhya dhaanam sarva dhaanaath pradhaanam - best charity is vidhyaa dhaanam

iv. Manushya Yagnya - all forms of social service
v. Bhoota Yagnya - all forms of contribution to all living beings other than human beings - non human living beings. 

Ashwatho vata vritksha chandana chathurur  
mandhaara kalpadrumau  
jamboo nimpa katham ...vathoocha sarala  
vriksha chayeksheerinaa  
sarvethey phalasamyuthaa prathidhinam  
vridhaa janam raajathe  
ramyam chaithra rathamchannandanavanam  
kurvanthu no mangalam. 

Let me remember all the trees.Let me grow and nourish so that they will do mangalam to the entire humanity. 

ganga sindhu saraswathi cha yamuna Godavari narmada cauvery sarayur mahendra thanayaa charmannvathi vedica.Kshipraa vethravathee mahaasuranadhee kyaathaa chayaa gandakee poornaa poornajalai samudra sahithaah kurvanthu no mangalam.

From the river in the top most India upto poornaa the river in Kerala – all the rivers I remember their contribution, I may not do anything for the river, but let me atleast not pollute and destroy them. 

Vaidica means universal citizen. Because he is aware not only of this world, he remembers all the stars and planets in the daily sandhyavandhanam, all planets – aadhithyam tharpayaami, somam tharpayami, angaaragam tharpayami– he remembers all the planets, the entire solar system – this grand awareness I should have and I should contribute.And this iscalled pancha maha yagnya

2. Madhyama Karmaani - Sakaama Karmani - Raajasa karmaani - Para udhaasan karmaani - those actions I ignore other people - I don't even bother about others and their existence or problems. Those selfish karmas are called sakama karmas or para udhaasana karmas. They will 
help you in your material well being. But they do not contribute much to the spiritual growth, either nil or limited.

3. Adharma Karmaani, Taamasa Karmaani, nishidha karmaani - prohibited, corrupt, destructive - para apakaara karmani - they will bring us down spiritually. also called Soonaa


Now a karma yogi's attempt is to change the proportion of the karmas in such a way that uthamama karmani are dominant in our life, madhyama karmas are less dominant(we also need food, clothing, shelter, money), Adharama karmani is to be zero - but is difficult - insecticides or baygon spray - we are happy but not the cockroaches - these can be neutralized by uthama karmaani

Uthama karmani - contributes to spiritual growth and neutralizes the paapam brought in by Adharma karmaani.

This is proper Karma. 

NOw let's talk about Yoga - proper attitude. 
What is the proper attitude. Any attitude is born out of right understanding. You can never develop a healthy and lasting attitude unless you understand the principle. 
Whenever I do an action, the moment I perform the action, it becomes part of the universe. It has left my hand and once the karma has become part of the universe, all the universal laws will act upon the karma. Because everything in the creation is acted upon by the laws of the universe.
moment I do an action, the universal laws take over and process the karma and the processed karma is called phalam.
These universal laws are tools in the hand of the lord to maintain the harmony of creation. 
Laws are processing you karma => God is processing the karma throught the tool of his own universal laws. 
Hence every karma or action is Ishwara arpannam - also called Ishwaraarpanna 
When we get the phalam it is not called karma phalam but Ishwara prasada; What comes from God is sacred, cannot be rejected, there cannot be criticized - should receive it with sense of fulfillment. 

Action - Ishwara apranna bhavana
Receiving - Prasaada bhaavana

This attitude is called Yogah

When I have these two bhaavanas, I enjoy an equanimous mind. Samathwam yoga uchyathe.
Because I am enthusiastic in every action. There is no dullness. There is no drudgery, there is no boredom because every action is offering to the Lord. I don’t hate any action. I love everything I do because it is an offering to God. I accept all experiences in life because they are Ishwara prasada. Which will lead to samathwam. Samathwa bhaavana is the result of Ishwaraarpanna prasada bhaavana. These two put together will lead to very, very 
fast spiritual growth which we call chitha shuddhi.

Chitha Shuddi - I understand that all my problems in life are not caused by the world but it is caused by my wrong handling of the world because of my ignorance.
Because of ignorant I – I handle the world wrongly, therefore I suffer. If I become the wise I – I know how to handle the world. World is nandanavanam, sampoornamjagadeva nandanavanam. So ignorant I - is the problem, wise I is the solution. This diagnosis is the result of karma yoga which is otherwise called chitha shuddhi.












