Human goals
Scriptures help with human goals
Infrastructure for achieving these human goals
Discipline required for achieving these human goals - mainly Moksha

Course of discipline - 3 folds - each is a yoga - Karma, Upasana, and Gnyaana
Karma Yoga - Proper action and attitude; attitude can change the quality of the action and attitude can change the quality of our response to the result of the action also. And therefore attitude is as much important as the action itself.

Upasana yoga - Samadhi yoga(called by Sanakaracharya) - Ashtaanga yoga
-> A program to make our personality fit for accomplishment of the purushartha. Purushaartha yogyathaa sampadhanaartham
-> a conditioning program

In the Kathopanishad, our very personality is compared to a vehicle, for reaching the goal. Just as a vehicle should be in fit condition fortraveling and successfully reaching the goal our personality must be in fit condition.
Vignyaana saarathir yasthu manah pragrahavaan narah sodhwanah paaramaapnothi thadvishnoh paramam padam
Thadh vishnoh paramampadam - only conditioned personality can attain the goal of life. 

Condition Program - for tailoring - our scriptures divide our personality into several layers for the facility of handling - this is done from many angles
We will see the three layers of personality
1. Kaayikam - physical body 
2. Vaachikam - organ of speech which indicates and influence our personality
3. maanasa amsha - psychological personality - sublest and most power - difficult to handle

1. Kaayikam - physical 
It is the most important instrument for achieving purushartha - hence we should never neglect body/health

a healthy body without any disease and it is not only in the materialistic portion of the Vedas, even in the spiritual portion in the vedantic shantith paata, many prayers are for fit personality

in many rituals, the priest will say, aroga drida - gaathra sampathyartham – arogadrdagaathram

 Om Bhadram Karnebhih Shrnuyama Devah 
Om Bhadram Karnnebhih Shrnnuyaama Devaah | 
Bhadram Pashyema-Akssabhir-Yajatraah | 
Sthirair-Anggais-Tussttuvaamsas-Tanuubhih | 
Vyashema Devahitam Yad-Aayuh | 

"Om apya-yantu mama angani 
Vak pranas chakshuh shrotram 
Atho balam indryani cha sarvani 
Sarvam brahma-upanishadam 
Maham brahma nira kuryam 
Ma ma brahma nira-karot 
Anira-karanam astu 
Anira-karanam me astu 
Tadat-mani nirate 
Ya upanishatsu dharmah 
Te mayi santu te mayi santu 
Om Shantih Shantih Shantih" – upanishadic shanthi paada –  

Om. May my limbs, speech prana, ear and power of all my senses grow vigorous. 
Everything is the Divine of the Upanishads. 
May I never deny the Divine. 
May the Divine never desert me. 
Let that relationship endure. 
Let the virtues recited in the Upanishads be rooted in me. 
May they repose in me. 
Om Peace Peace Peace. 

hence health is extremely important
one who cannot voluntarily give time for health will have to forcibly give time for diseases

Scriptures also talk about diet, exercises and stuff... But modern medicine has also caught up 

Note!
If we seek physical health as the goal itself, then that is a problem - Seeking physical health for unworthy goals is wrong. 

2. Vaachika Amsha - verbal conditioning - Vaak Tapas
Vivekachoodamani points out – yogasya prathamam dwaaram vaang nirodho parigrahaha.Niraashaacha nireehaacha. 
Yogasya prathamam dwaaram- the first step of spiritual pursuit is vaang nirodha – 
verbal conditionings.Speech discipline
What's speech discipline?
Krishna gives four factors in 17th chap of Gita
i. anugveda aram vaakyam  - speech shouldn't hurt anyone - avoid all forms of abuse/criticisms/blaming/denigration/arguments

Now even if I have to hurt them then I will have to do it subtly; cutting a person with knife is different from doctor cutting a person incisively after GIVING ANAESTHETIC to help them!

ii. Sathyam - most imp - first step for reaching brahman 
Sathyam eva sathyam jayathe
Every lie takes me away from God. 
Even in the prayer - Asathoma Sathgamaya - 

Truth in empirical plane alone will help you get at the absolute plane(god) 

We should condition our mind that every lie hurts more than the benefit received by that lie.

Even if we have some unavoidable lies, we can neutralize them using Prayashitham - by voluntarily undergoing pain. 



iii. priyam - be pleasant - soft, slow, and also polite and also gentle words - Mangala Shabhdaha - never use inauspicious, curing words


iv.hitham - whatever is good to the listener
one of the worst forms of himsa is talking to a person who is not interested. ensure the other person is interested first!


If one follows these four parameters - generally you will much less to talk - noise pollution decreases XD. 


3. Maanasa Amsha - mental conditioning - all forms of meditation - mental conditional - primary meaning of upaasna means meditation for mental conditioning. 
Since mind cannot be handled without taking care of body and speech - body and speech are stepping stone for mental conditioning - hence first two become indirect methods for conditioning the mind - hence any meditation program includes body and speech conditioning.

Mind and body/speech are connected!
Try to talk slow when angry/sad?
And all psychosomatic diseases reveal that your mental condition and physical body are connected and therefore our approach is through the body and speech, we try to handle the mind. 


Therefore upaasana primarily means mental discipline and secondarily means physical and verbal disciplines

all forms of meditation can be grouped into four types based on the type of discipline that you want to inculcate in the mind. 

i. relaxation - aim is relaxing the mind in particular and all other parts of the body - physical, verbal, sensory withdrawal
especially in today's world this is very relevant - mind and health needs relaxation

ii. focusing / concentration - train to develop attention span - focus in a field for a length of time. 
concentration meditation and generally in our scriptures, they prescribe maanasa pooja, mental worship of the Lord or maanasa paaraayanam mentally chanting something or maanasa japa mentally chanting one naama of the Lord.

Differnece between Japa and parayanam
The difference between paaraayanam and japa is – paaraayanam refers to chanting any prayer, in japa only one name of the Lord is taken.

iii. Expansion meditation - .I learn to expand my mind to visualize the totality of creation.Then only we know our relative significance. Which is nothing but zero.

Everything should be put in its place and I will know my place only when I look at myself from the standpoint of totality.It is meditation of the creation itself.Imagine the stars and galaxies and the sky and then the solar system and the planet and continents and rivers and mountains and birds and animals and then human beings and adhullai – oru 50 / 60 kilos of decaying matter is the physical body.
VISHWA ROOPA DHYAANAM
This is called vishwa roopa dhyaanam. Because we look upon the creation as the universal form of God.

iv. Value meditation or transformation meditation - being inner transformation through meditation; 
remember that our thought pattern determines our life, our journey and our destiny

watch your thoughts, they become your words,watch your words they become you actions, watch your actions, they become your habits, watch your habits they become your character, watch your character it becomes your destiny

Though is the subtlest bheejan or seed - which determines your future. 

!!!!!!!!!!
YATH BHAAVAM THATH BHAVATHI - you think so you become.
In shastra it is known by two technical words, thath krathun nyaayahor brahmara keeda nyaayah– never neglect watching or being aware of your thought pattern, they determine your future.  

what is the thought pattern which will take me towards the spiritual goal – it is called daivee sampad

a set of thought pattern known as aasuri sampad which will take me away from the spiritual goal.Like jealousy. Like depression, impatience, irritation.

thoughts are like bricks which determine the shape of the building.If the shape of the building has to be changed, you have to change the brick arrangement.
Today we can even cure diseases by just ill power.

Mind is a powerful instrument with a 
tremendous sankalpah shakthi.This value meditation is exploiting or utilizing our sankalpa shakthi.This is fourth type of meditaion. 

---- ---- ---- ----

not only these three should be healthy - but they should be well coordinated too.

our life is a team work undertaken by the body, speech and mind.They should not function at cross purposes. 

In fact every time you lie, we are breaking the coordination by creating a division between speech and mind. 
Punctuality is a method of developing integration. When you fix a time, that is mind.And you fix up at 
7 o clock and at 7.30 you wonder whether to go or not. There is no integration.

Punctuality is a very important discipline – to integrate the personality. Which is called aarjavam. 


There is no chronological order between karma and upaasana, at one stage you might focus more on or other - all are equally important. 

