Jnana Yoga - course of discipline meant for gaining knowledge. 
Gnyaana praapyartham yoga

knowledge of what?
Self-knowledge - Aatma gnyaanam

What's the purpose of this?
they give us freedom or moksha - the highest goal

naivatasyakrtēnārthōnākrtēnēhakaścana| 
nacāsyasarvabhūtēṣukaścidarthavyapāśrayaḥ|| 3.18|| 
Krishna in Gita

This inner freedom expresses in the form of three fold virtues which are very useful for human life. This inner freedom gives me three fold virtues which are very, very useful for my life which virtues are beautifully presented in a well known prayer called – the serenity prayer.
A beautiful prayer. Serenity means balance of mind. Samathwam.
In this prayer, we address the Lord and ask for these three virtues. 
Oh Lord, grant me the serenity to accept what cannot be changed in life. Oh Lord grant me the courage to change what can be changed in life. And Oh Lord grant me the wisdom to know what can be changed and what cannot be changed. Oh Lord – grant me the serenity, grant me the courage and grant me the wisdom to discriminate.

acceptance, courage and discretion - three virtues

Acceptance - is not negative acceptance - not with a feeling victimization! without any bitterness - one that doesn't produce any hatred, will not produce any sense of injustice being done to me, no negative reaction

Life will become beautiful if I can healthily accept all the choiceless situations and courageously change what can be transformed and I am able to discern which is which.

How to get this self-knowledge?
Can achieved using the instrument of knowledge. 

pramaanam - instrument of knowledge
pramaathaa  one who uses this instrument of knowledge
Pramaa - the knowledge generated
prameya - the object that is being known

pramaathaa uses the pramaanam and acquires pramaa with regard to the prameyam

Scriptures have made an elaborate study on this pramaanam;
we have got five instruments - hence called Paurusheya pramaanaani.

I. perception - pratyaksham - eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin.  - perceptual knowledge
II. inference - anumaanam 
III. Postulate - arthaavatthi
IV. comparision - upamaanam 
V.Fifth - noncognition - anubhalabdhi

We will not dive into these; 
we can reduce these five into two to be pragmatic.  Perception and inference

Now the instrument we use will depend on the object that I want to know; 
eg. If I have to know about color - I need eyes! no other option

Gynaanam is acquired by apt pramaanam

Now these 5 instrument are for studying the objective world. - none are capable of studing the very subject behind this instrument; this is the limitation of perception and infererence also - even science - 
eg. eyes can see everything, but can never see themselves. 
Similary I cannot study about myself. 

Inorder to study about myself I need another object - eg. to see my eyes I use mirror. 
Similarly I have to bringin the 6th instrument which is Shastra pramaana - scriptural teaching also called shabdha pramaana - it is not present with me, It has to be brought from outside hence called Apaurusheya pramaana; 

God has given, 
Mirror for outside beauty; scriptural mirror for inner beauty; 

Even though this mirror exists, you should know how to use it! can see the backside of mirror instead of front; hence you need to know how to use the mirror. 


shastram or scriptures can help you only if you study the scriptures properly and if you handle the scriptures properly you can see your beauty, you can get self knowledge. 

Now when I use scriptures I run into another problem - scriptures use a peculiar method to impart knowledge. 
Normally, when you read book - first you get the information, then you covert that to direct experience by coming in contact with the object. 
But in self-knowledge we don't have these stages at all. 


The "direct experience dichotomy" doesn't exist in self knowledge. 

Now to get this self-knowledge(freedom from self ignorance) we need gnyaana yoga. 
This contains three fold exercise. 

Imagine Karna’s dialogue with Kunti.Kunti informs karma I have got six children, I know five of them.The Pandavas.He can never forget.And therefore Karna asks Kunti, Oh Kunti I would like to know and meet the sixth son of Kunti. First I want information and thereafter direct contact.Now imagine Kunti says, tat twam asi.The sixth son happens to be yourself 
and imagine Karna says, now I have the information that I am the sixth son – Kunti 
please tell me, where can I meet the sixth son. I have got the information that I am the sixth one, please tell me how can I directly meet.It doesn’t exist. It is only removal of ignorance regarding the sixth son, there is no question of information-experience dichotomy in certain case.
REMOVAL OF IGNORANCE.

I) shravanam - exposing myself to scriptural teaching - from a competent guide - during this time no question is allowed. we only have to get comprehensive teaching from all the angles. In all aspects and in its totality. 

You are allowed to disagree.You are allowed to keep aside your questions and listen totally.Be patient,shravanam requires a lot of patience.Never come to a conclusion. Never be judgmental, never be critical.

II) mananam 

After comprehensively listening, after exposure to the teaching for a length of time, I bring out all my questions. And generally the beauty of this teaching is by the time you complete the study systematically doubts will not be there. Scriptures themselves handle all the possible question, that's the beauty of it. 

The education will be in the form of guru shishya samvaadha (dialogue) like LLM - the shishya character will have all the questions that you have. 

doubts are obstacles to knowledge. Therefore mananam removes all the obstacles – in the intellect and makes the knowledge into doubtless knowledge or conviction.


SHRAVANAM REMOVES IGNORANCE
MANANAM REMOVES DOUBTS OR INTELLECTUAL PROBLEMS; 
III) nidhidhyaasanam. - internalization or assimilation of this knowledge. and removal of habitual behaviour


the old self-image continues for a length of time and therefore we require some time in which we should allow the transformation to take place and that process is called niddidhyaasanam in which I keep in touch with shastram.Even though the study part is over, I keep in touch with the shastram or I keep in touch with the gnyaanis – wise people.Sat-sanga, or shastra-sanga I continue, because the association influences my personality.And not only I keep in touch with shastra I lead an alert life, monitoring my responses.And making sure that every response in every situation is governed by the new teaching and not governed by the old misunderstood personality. 

And assimilated knowledge alone nourishes me. Like assimilated food alone nourishes me.It is not the amount of food that I eat that matters, but the amount of food that I digest – that alone matters.

That is why Swami Chinmayaananda puts it wonderfully –you have gone through ten Upanishads, wonderful. But how many Upanishads have gone through you.

---- ---- ---- ----

shravanam, plus mananam plus nidhidhyaasanam is gnyaana yoga.And this gnyaana yoga will give self knowledge.Self-knowledge will give moksha which means that I am free in the presence of things and free in the absence of things.In the presence of people, in the absence of people,in the presence of my life and even in death.And this is gnyaana yoga the subtlest form of sadhana.

All the three yogas are compulsory - can't skip any; 
And if at all a person skips karma and upaasana and successfully gains gnyaanam, he must have gone through both of them in the past janma.

These three yogas are such that there is domination of one yoga at one stage of life. 


In Brahmacharya ashrama it is primarily studying the theory. What is life, what is the 
goal, brahmacharya ashrama is study oriented and then the other three ashramaas 
are meant for predominantly practicing the three yogas.

Grhasthaashrama is karma yoga pradhaana, vanaprastha ashrama is upaasana yoga pradhaana and sanyaasa ashrama is gnyaana yoga pradhaana.

Even if you do not go through these four ashramas physically you will have to make the appropriate modifications in your life style depending upon which yoga, you dominantly 
practice.

