Bhakthi yoga - has various shades of meaning and also confusing. 
Bhakthi has two different meanings in scirptures; 
I) devotion towards God - love directed to higher principle - something revere, which is sacred. 
Maathru bhakthi
Pitru bhakthi
Guru bhakthi
desha bhakthi
Ishwara bhakthi

Scriputres has elaborate these two very clearly
-> 1. Love
-> 2. love towards God. 

-> 1. love
scriptures say that there are only three things that humans direct love towards
I. goals that they want to accomplish - love of "end"
II. the means that helps them achieve the goals they want to accomplish love of "means"
III. love of oneself. love of "self"

let's leave God here, we will talk about god in 2. Love towards god. 

There is gradation in intensity of love. 
I. end - mediocre;
II. means - the least amount of love; love for means is not for the sake of means, but for the goal. Once goals is reached the attitude towards means is different. 
III. oneself - highest

Yāvadvittopārjana saktaḥ stāvannija parivāro raktaḥ 
Paschājjī vati jarjara dehe vārtāṁ ko’pi na prcchati gehe 

Most of the time, love for people is purely love as a means to accomplish the end and often money is the end.And therefore love for the end is superior to love for the means.If means is dear to you, end is dearer to you. 

Now between goal and self - self is superior. 
WE love ends hoping that it will give comfort, security and happiness. It's for my benefit, my comfort, security and happiness that I love ends. Moment particular end doesn't give me joy, I drop it. 
Everything is loved for one's own sake only. 

means-love is called mandha, 
end-love is called madhyama and 
self-love is called uthama.

Now coming to God. 
2. love towards God. - depends on how you look at God. 

I. 
Majority of people look upon God only as the MEANS for various worldly ends. If I go to this temple, if I worship this God, then I will be able to accomplish this end and we have got various worldly ends and to accomplish them God isused as the means and as long as you look upon God as a means, 
what is the intensityof love – it is called mandha bhakthi. 
And that is why people get angry with God also, when requests are not fulfilled.
t is a conditional love and once the condition is fulfilled, I love, if the condition is mot fulfilled I allow God to go, I reject. Therefore such a bhakthi is called mandha bhakthi. 

II. these people are rare. 
-> their understanding of God is clearer enough that they are able to choose God as the end of life.End of life nna as the goal of life. Because they know God represents security. God 
represents peace and God represents happiness.Once I understand God as the symbolic representation of peace, love and happiness, then I know that everyone in life is seeking security and happiness.Peace alone.And once I know God represents peace, I know that God is the end of my life.And naturally my love of God is - as the end - and therefore it is more intense than the previous one.Because it is end love.Therefore this bhakthi is called madhyama bhakthi. 

III. Uthama Bhakthi - rarest - I look upon Godnot as the means or not even as the end, but Godas non-different from myself. Soham asmi. 
Soham asmi means what – 
that Lord is essentially not different from me and therefore the Lord and the self 
being identical God love will become equal to what – self love and since self love is 
the most intense love, that form of love is called uthama bhakthi.

mandha bhaktha - god is dear
madhyama bhaktha - god is dearer
uthamam bhaktha - god is dearest

---- --- ---- ---
Second meaning of bhakthi

The second meaning is bhakthi as a course of discipline to accomplish the spiritual goal.
Bhakthi is a course of discipline meant to accomplish the highest goal of life namely moksha or freedom and to convey this idea of bhakthi as a course of discipline, generally the word yoga is added. 


māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa 
bhakti-yogena sevate 
sa guṇān samatītyaitān 
brahma-bhūyāya kalpate   ||१४.२६|| - Krishna in Gita

Now what does it mean by saying - Bhakthi as a course of discipline?
Bhakthi is not an exclusive course of discipline - instead it's the name of the entire group of discipline consisting of all the three.

You can say, first stage of bhakthi is karma yoga, second stage is upasana yoga, and third stage in gnyana yoga. 

karma yoga roopa bhakthi yoga, upaasana yoga roopa bhakthi yoga and gnyaana yoga roopa bhakthi yoga – roopa means in the form of 

why do we call all three togehter as bhakthi?
Bhakthi is the common atmosphere in which all the three yogas are practiced. 

Karma - 
The attitude that one enjoys is dedicating all actions to the Lord and accepting without resistance all the consequences of my stupid or intelligent actions.So how can there be karma yoga without eshwaraaarpanna bhaavana and prasaada bhaavana.Therefore a karma yogi should necessarily have bhakthi.When.All the time. Because every action is dedicated to the Lord.

Upaasana - 
In upaasana yoga, I have to meditate upon the Lord for developing mental discipline and integration.How can I meditate upon God if I don’t have bhakthi.

Gnyaana yoga also involves bhakthi. Before any study of scriptures we start with sahanaa vavathu or aabyaayanthu mamaamgaani – some prayer or the other we chant and we end with prayer.And not only that in gnyaana yoga, we are enquiring into our own real nature, discovering the identity of our real nature with the nature of the God.

Self realization or discovery is nothing but God discovery.Therefore gnyaana yoga involves self-discovery, which is none other than God discovery.And therefore gnyaana yoga also involves bhakthi.


So what is the first meaning. First he has love of God in the form of mandha bhakthi, madhyama bhakthi and uthama bhakthi. Next I said bhakthi means a course of discipline to attain the spiritual goal consisting of karma yoga, upaasana yoga and gnyaana yoga. 


yatkaroṣiyadaśnāsi |yajjuhoṣidadāsiyat | 
yattapasyasikauṁteya |tatkuruṣvamad-arpaṇam | |



---- ---- ---- ---- 
What is God, what is the principle of God?
Without discussing god how can we discuss Bhakthi?
HOw can you love something without understanding what that is?
Hence let's understand God. 

Scriptures give three defns for god, depending upon the maturity of the seeker and intellectual caliber. 

The first definition for the beginner is – God is the creator of the world.In sanskirt, jagat kartaa eshwara
Justification - any well designed thing should have an intelligent creator behind it? 
Then what about this universe?
Everything is creation of god. everything has a purpose; if we were to say something is useless, then it's just that we haven't discovered it's purpose yet. 

Once I define eshwara as jagat karta you will visualize God as a person, because we are used to intelligent beings as human beings or a person and therefore we imagine a very very intelligent God who is omniscient and who is omnipotent and since we don’t see him around,
safely place him above the clouds.


So this is called Lord as a creator, as a personal God, with a special form.As Rama, Krishna, Vishnu, Shiva, etc. I will call this God, eka roopa eshwara

Once we reach enough maturity - we can go next level - God is the cause of world jagat kaarnam eshwarea ; 

karta -> to -> Kaarnam 

If god is creator, what was the resource that he used? raw material?
before big bang we cannot even conceive of time and space.We can talk about them after big bang.But not before.Therefore even before the creation of time and space and objects, when God alone was there, where is the raw material.So scriptures point out that God himself happens to be the very material also out of which the world is made and therefore we say God is the kaaranam – the very material out of which the world is created.

just like spider - creates a home from itself. 

raw material alone becomes theproduct manifold product and since God is the raw material, God alone has become the universe.Therefore the whole universe is nothing but God alone.

He is no more eka roopa; he is now aneka roopa or vishwaroopa; 

---
now lext level of maturity; 
Jagat adhistaanam eshwara

The argument:
God did not become the world because if I say God has become everything you will immediately ask – swamiji – all the ugly things in creation – all the diseases in the creation, all the criminals in the creation – are they also God

God does not become the world, God appears as the world with different forms not affected by any form in which he appears. 

Substratum - a foundation or basis of something.
GOD IS THE VERY SUBSTRATUM OF ALL THE FORMS WHICH HE 
TRANSCENDS.God is the substratum of all the forms or the entire creation which he 
transcends.God is the ultimate substratum. God is the ultimate reality, God is the 
ultimate stuff behind the creation but not affected by them.This is jagat adhistaanna 
eshwara. 


since God can transcend into anyform and be unaffected - then God has got no form. 
Arropa Eshwara 

GOD CREATES THE WORLD, FIRST STAGE OF UNDERSTANDING, GOD BECOMES THE WORLD - SECOND STAGE OF UNDERSTANDING.GOD APPEARS AS THE WORLD, THIRD STAGE OF UNDERSTANDING.
God has one form. Eka roopa isfirststageof understanding, aneka roopais thesecond stage of understanding and aroopais the final stageof understanding. 

it transcends good and bad.Beautiful and ugly. It transcends all of them


One doesn't displace the others

in three stages, the latter one does not displace the former one. It is only of a different dimension – the one who has come to aroopa bhakthi, he has not lost eka roopa and aneka roopa.Aroopa bhakthi includes the other two. That is why - the greatest advaitins who talked about formless God they could happily worship God with any particular form also – they could happily appreciate Lord as the beautiful nature also and they could transcend both of them and arrive at the formless also. 

Just as Einsteinian physics does not displace Newtonian physics – both are valid in their own level.

Hence we have nine forms of Bhakthi:
-> Mandha, madhyama,uthama - bhathi is love of god
-> karma yoga bhakthi, upasana yoga bhakthi, gnyana yoga bhakthi - in standpoint of Saadhana
-> eka roopa bhakthi, aneka roopa bhakthi, aroopa bhakthi - depending on my understanding of God. 


Devathaa drishtyaa bhakthi thrayam.So bhaavana drishtyaa, saadhana drishtyaa and devathaa drishtyaa.

The word bhakthi is used in all these meanings and therefore any time we talk about bhakthi, you should understand the context and grasp the meaning.




